<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html><h1>Scaffolding and the Site Template</h1>
        <p id="x-3" class="hascomments">So you're tired of running small examples, and ready to write a real site? Then you're at
            the right chapter. Even with the entire Yesod library at your fingertips, there are
            still a lot of steps you need to go through to get a production-quality site setup:</p>
        <ul id="ul_nys_vtf_42">
            <li id="x-4">Config file parsing</li>
            <li id="x-5">Signal handling (*nix)</li>
            <li id="x-6">More efficient static file serving</li>
            <li id="x-7">A good file layout</li>
        </ul>
        <p id="x-8" class="hascomments">The scaffolded site is a combination of many Yesoders' best practices combined together
            into a ready-to-use skeleton for your sites. It is highly recommended for all sites.
            This chapter will explain the overall structure of the scaffolding, how to use it, and
            some of its less-than-obvious features.</p>
        <p class="hascomments">For the most part, this chapter will not contain code samples. It is recommended that you
            follow along with an actual scaffolded site.</p>
        <aside id="x-9" class="note">Due to the nature of the scaffolded site, it is the most fluid component of Yesod, and
            can change from version to version. It is possible that the information in this chapter
            is slightly outdated.</aside><h2>How to Scaffold</h2>
  <p id="x-3" class="hascomments">The yesod package installs both a library and an
   executable (conveniently named yesod as well). This executable
   provides a few commands (run yesod by itself to get a list). In order to
   generate a scaffolding, the command is yesod init. This will start a
   question-and-answer process where you get to provide basic details (your name, the project name,
   etc). After answering the questions, you will have a site template in a subfolder with the name
   of your project.</p>
  <p id="x-7" class="hascomments">The most important of these questions is the database backend. You get four choices here:
   SQLite, PostgreSQL, MongoDB, and tiny. tiny is not a database backend; instead, it is specifying
   that you do not want to use any database. This option also turns off a few extra dependencies,
   giving you a leaner overall site. The remainder of this chapter will focus on the scaffoldings
   for one of the database backends. There will be minor differences for the tiny backend.</p>
  <p id="x-8" class="hascomments">After creating your files, the scaffolder will print a message about getting started.
   It gives two sets of options for commands: one using cabal, and the other
   using cabal-dev. cabal-dev is basically a wrapper around
   cabal which causes all dependencies to be built in a sandbox. Using it is a good way to ensure
   that installing other packages will not break your site setup. It is strongly recommended. If you
   don't have cabal-dev, you can install it by running cabal
    install cabal-dev.</p>
  <p id="x-10" class="hascomments">Note that you really do need to use the cabal install
    --only-dependencies (or cabal-dev install
    --only-dependencies) command. Most likely, you do not yet have all the dependencies in
   place needed by your site. For example, none of the database backends, nor the Javascript
   minifier (hjsmin) are installed when installing the yesod package.</p>
  <p id="x-14" class="hascomments">Finally, to launch your development site, you would use yesod
    devel (or yesod --dev devel). This site will
   automatically rebuild and reload whenever you change your code.</p>
 <h2>File Structure</h2>
  <p id="x-3" class="hascomments">The scaffolded site is built as a fully cabalized Haskell package. In addition to
   source files, config files, templates, and static files are produced as well.</p>
 <h3>Cabal file</h3>
  <p id="x-3" class="hascomments">Whether directly using cabal, or indirectly using yesod devel, building your code will always go through the cabal file. If
      you open the file, you'll see that there are both library and executable blocks. Only one of
      these is built at a time, depending on the value of the library-only
      flag. If library-only is turned on, then the library is built, which
      is how yesod devel calls your app. Otherwise, the executable is
      built.</p>
    <p id="x-9" class="hascomments">The library-only flag should only be used by
        yesod devel; you should never be explicitly passing it into
        cabal. There is an additional flag, dev, that
      allows cabal to build an executable, but turns on some of the same features as
      the library-only flag, i.e., no optimizations and reload versions of the Shakespearean
      template functions.</p>
  <p id="x-12" class="hascomments">In general, you will build as follows:</p>
    <ul id="ul_4wr_4wg_42">
      <li id="x-13">When developing, use yesod devel exclusively.</li>
      <li id="x-14">When building a production build, perform cabal clean
          &amp;&amp; cabal configure &amp;&amp; cabal build. This will produce an
        optimized executable in your dist folder.<aside id="x-16" class="note">In the past we
          had a -fproduction flag. If you produced a scaffolded site in the past,
          you may have to use this flag to get a production build.</aside></li>
    </ul>
    <p id="x-17" class="hascomments">You'll also notice that we specify all language extensions in the cabal file. The
      extensions are specified twice: once for the executable, and once for the
      library. If you add any extensions to the list, add it to both places.</p>
    <p id="x-19" class="hascomments">You might be surprised to see the NoImplicitPrelude extension. We turn this
      on since the site includes its own module, Import, with a few changes to the
      Prelude that make working with Yesod a little more convenient.</p>
    <p id="x-22" class="hascomments">The last thing to note is the exported-modules list. If you add any modules to your
      application, you must update this list to get yesod devel to work correctly.
      Unfortunately, neither Cabal nor GHC will give you a warning if you forgot to make this
      update, and instead you'll get a very scary-looking error message from yesod devel.<aside id="x-24" class="note">One of our planned improvements to yesod devel is to check if
        there are any missing modules.</aside></p>
 <h3>Routes and entities</h3>
  <p id="x-3" class="hascomments">Multiple times in this book, you've seen a comment like "We're declaring our routes/entities
   with quasiquotes for convenience. In a production site, you should use an external file." The
   scaffolding uses such an external file.</p>
  <p id="x-4" class="hascomments">Routes are defined in config/routes, and entities in
    config/models. They have the exact same syntax as the quasiquoting
   you've seen throughout the book, and yesod devel knows to automatically
   recompile the appropriate modules when these files change.</p>
  <p id="x-7" class="hascomments">The models files is referenced by Model.hs. You are free to declare whatever you like in this file, but here are some
   guidelines:</p>
  <ul id="ul_gui_tyg_oe">
   <li id="x-9">Any data types used in entities
    must be imported/declared in Model.hs, above the persistFile call.</li>
   <li id="x-12">Helper utilities should either be declared in Import.hs
    or, if very model-centric, in a file within the Model folder and
    imported into Import.hs.</li>
  </ul>
 <h3>Foundation and Application modules</h3>
  <p id="x-3" class="hascomments">The mkYesod function which we have used throughout the book declares a few
   things:</p>
  <ul id="ul_ajc_dzg_oe">
   <li id="x-5">Route type</li>
   <li id="x-6">Route render function</li>
   <li id="x-7">Dispatch function</li>
  </ul>
  <p id="x-8" class="hascomments">The dispatch function refers to all of the handler functions, and therefore all of those must
   either be defined in the same file as the dispatch function, or be imported by the dispatch
   function.</p>
  <p id="x-9" class="hascomments">Meanwhile, the handler functions will almost certainly refer to the route type. Therefore,
    they must be either in the same file where the route type is defined, or must import that
   file. If you follow the logic here, your entire application must essentially live in a single
   file!</p>
  <p id="x-11" class="hascomments">Clearly this isn't what we want. So instead of using mkYesod, the scaffolding
   site uses a decomposed version of the function. Foundation calls
    mkYesodData, which declares the route type and render function. Since it does
   not declare the dispatch function, the handler functions need not be in scope.
    Import.hs imports Foundation.hs, and all the handler modules
   import Import.hs.</p>
  <p id="x-18" class="hascomments">In Application.hs, we call mkYesodDispatch, which creates our
   dispatch function. For this to work, all handler functions must be in scope, so be sure to add an
   import statement for any new handler modules you create.</p>
  <p id="x-21" class="hascomments">Other than that, Application.hs is pretty simple. It provides
   two functions: withDevelAppPort is used by yesod
    devel to launch your app, and getApplication is used by the
   executable to launch.</p>
  <p id="x-24" class="hascomments">Foundation.hs is much more exciting. It:</p>
  <ul id="ul_ero_hah_oe">
   <li id="x-25">Declares your foundation datatype</li>
   <li id="x-26">Declares a number of instances, such as Yesod,
     YesodAuth, and YesodPersist</li>
   <li id="x-27">Imports the messages files. If you look for the line starting with mkMessage, you will see that it specifies the folder containing the messages
     (messages) and the default language (en, for English).</li>
  </ul>
  <p id="x-30" class="hascomments">This is the right file for adding extra instances for your foundation, such as
    YesodAuthEmail or YesodBreadcrumbs.</p>
  <p id="x-31" class="hascomments">We'll be referring back to this file later, as we discussed some of the special
   implementations of Yesod typeclass methods.</p>
 <h3>Import</h3>
  <p id="x-3" class="hascomments">The Import module was born out of a few commonly recurring
   patterns.</p>
  <ul id="ul_skn_hbh_oe">
   <li id="x-4">I want to define some helper functions (maybe the &lt;&gt; = mappend operator)
    to be used by all handlers.</li>
   <li id="x-6">I'm always adding the same five import statements (Data.Text,
     Control.Applicative, etc) to every handler module.</li>
   <li id="x-7">I want to make sure I never use some evil function (head,
     readFile, ...) from Prelude.<aside id="x-8" class="note">Yes, evil is
     hyperbole. If you're wondering why I listed those functions as bad: head is partial, and throws exceptions on an empty list, and readFile uses lazy I/O, which doesn't close file handles quickly enough. Also,
      readFile uses String instead of
     Text.</aside></li>
  </ul>
  <p id="x-11" class="hascomments">The solution is to turn on the NoImplicitPrelude language extension,
   re-export the parts of Prelude we want, add in all the other stuff we want,
   define our own functions as well, and then import this file in all handlers.</p>
 <h3>Handler modules</h3>
  <p id="x-3" class="hascomments">Handler modules should go inside the Handler folder. The site
   template includes one module: Handler/Root.hs. How you split up your handler
   functions into individual modules is your decision, but a good rule of thumb is:</p>
  <ul id="ul_esf_zbh_oe">
   <li id="x-4">Different methods for the same route should go in the same file, e.g.
     getBlogR and postBlogR.</li>
   <li id="x-5">Related routes can also usually go in the same file, e.g.,
     getPeopleR and getPersonR.</li>
  </ul>
  <p id="x-6" class="hascomments">Of course, it's entirely up to you. When you add a new handler file, make sure you do the
   following:</p>
  <ul id="ul_qml_dch_oe">
   <li id="x-7">Add it to version control (you are using version control, right?).</li>
   <li id="x-9">Add it to the cabal file.</li>
   <li id="x-10">Add it to the Application.hs file.</li>
   <li id="x-11">Put a module statement at the top, and an import Import line below it.</li>
  </ul>
  <aside id="x-20" class="note">One of the planned improvements to the yesod executable is to automate
   these four steps.</aside>
 <h2>widgetFile</h2>
  <p id="x-3" class="hascomments">It's very common to want to include CSS and Javascript specific to a page. You don't want to
   have to remember to include those Lucius and Julius files manually every time you refer to a
   Hamlet file. For this, the site template provides the widgetFile function.</p>
  <p id="x-5" class="hascomments">If you have a handler function:</p>
  <pre id="x-6"><code>getRootR = defaultLayout $(widgetFile "homepage")</code></pre>
  <p id="x-7" class="hascomments">, Yesod will look for the following files:</p>
  <ul id="ul_vih_ddh_oe">
   <li id="x-8">templates/homepage.hamlet</li>
   <li id="x-10">templates/homepage.lucius</li>
   <li id="x-12">templates/homepage.cassius</li>
   <li id="x-14">templates/homepage.julius</li>
  </ul>
  <p id="x-16" class="hascomments">If any of those files are present, they will be automatically included in the output.</p>
  <aside id="x-17" class="note">Due to the nature of how this works, if you launch your app with yesod
    devel, and then create a new file (e.g.,
    templates/homepage.julius), the contents will not be
   included until the file calling widgetFile is recompiled. In such a case, you
   may need to force a save of that file to get yesod devel to recompile.</aside>
 <h2>defaultLayout</h2>
  <p id="x-3" class="hascomments">One of the first things you're going to want to customize is the look of your site. The layout
   is actually broken up into two files:</p>
  <ul id="ul_jjz_kch_oe">
   <li id="x-4">templates/default-layout-wrapper.hamlet contains just the basic shell of
    a page. This file is interpreted as plain Hamlet, not as a Widget, and therefore cannot refer
    to other widgets, embed i18n strings, or add extra CSS/JS.</li>
   <li id="x-6">templates/default-layout.hamlet is where you would put the bulk of your
    page. You must remember to include the widget value in the page, as that
    contains the per-page contents. This file is interpreted as a Widget.</li>
  </ul>
  <p id="x-10" class="hascomments">Also, since default-layout is included via the widgetFile function,
   any Lucius, Cassius, or Julius files named default-layout.* will
   automatically be included as well.</p>
 <h2>Static files</h2>
  <p id="x-3" class="hascomments">The scaffolded site automatically includes the static file subsite, optimized for
   serving files that will not change over the lifetime of the current build. What this means is
   that:</p>
  <ul id="ul_rui_odh_oe">
   <li id="x-4">When your static file identifiers are generated (e.g.,
     static/mylogo.png becomes mylogo_png), a query-string
    parameter is added to it with a hash of the contents of the file. All of this happens at compile
    time.</li>
   <li id="x-5">When yesod-static serves your static files, it sets expiration
    headers far in the future, and incldues an etag based on a hash of your content.</li>
   <li id="x-6">Whenever you embed a link to mylogo_png, the rendering includes the
    query-string parameter. If you change the logo, recompile, and launch your new app, the query
    string will have changed, causing users to ignore the cached copy and download a new
    version.</li>
  </ul>
  <p id="x-7" class="hascomments">Additionally, you can set a specific static root in your
    Settings.hs file to serve from a different domain name. This has the
   advantage of not requiring transmission of cookies for static file requests, and also lets you
   offload static file hosting to a CDN or a service like Amazon S3. See the comments in the file
   for more details.</p>
  <p id="x-8" class="hascomments">Another optimization is that CSS and Javascript included in your widgets will not be included
   inside your HTML. Instead, their contents will be written to an external file, and a link given.
   This file will be named based on a hash of the contents as well, meaning:</p>
  <ol id="ol_xmt_geh_oe">
   <li id="x-9">Caching works properly.</li>
   <li id="x-10">Yesod can avoid an expensive disk write of the CSS/Javascript file contents if a file with
    the same hash already exists.</li>
  </ol>
  <p id="x-11" class="hascomments">Finally, all of your Javascript is automatically minified via hjsmin.</p>
 <h2>Conclusion</h2>
  <p id="x-3" class="hascomments">The purpose of this chapter was not to explain every line that exists in the scaffolded site,
   but instead to give a general overview to how it works. The best way to become more familiar with
   it is to jump right in and start writing a Yesod site with it.</p>
 </html>