<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE concept PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Concept//EN" "concept.dtd">
<concept id="haskell-8"><title>Haskell</title><conbody>
  <p id="8-x-3">In order to use Yesod, you're going to have to know at least the basics of Haskell.
   Additionally, Yesod uses some features of Haskell that aren't covered in most introductory texts.
   While this book assumes the reader has a basic familiarity with Haskell, this chapter is intended
   to fill in the gaps.</p>
  <p id="8-x-4">If you are already fluent in Haskell, feel free to completely skip this chapter. Also, if you
   would prefer to start off by getting your feet wet with Yesod, you can always come back to this
   chapter later as a reference.</p>
  <p id="8-x-5">If you are looking for a more thorough introduction to Haskell, I would recommend either Real
   World Haskell or Learn You a Haskell.</p>
 </conbody><concept id="terminology-9"><title>Terminology</title><conbody>
  <p id="9-x-3">Even for those familiar with Haskell as a language, there can sometimes be some
   confusion about terminology. Let's establish some base terms that we can use throughout this
   book.</p>
  <dl id="9-x-4">
   <dlentry id="9-x-5">
    <dt id="9-x-6">Data type</dt>
    <dd id="9-x-7">This is one of the core building blocks for a strongly typed language like Haskell. Some
     data types, like <codeph id="9-x-8">Int</codeph>, can be treated as primitive values, while other data
     types will build on top of these to create more complicated values. For example, you might
     represent a person
     with:<codeblock id="9-x-9" outputclass="haskell">data Person = Person Text Int</codeblock>Here, the
      <codeph id="9-x-10">Text</codeph> would give the person's name, and the <codeph id="9-x-11">Int</codeph> would give
     the person's age. Due to its simplicity, this specific example type will recur throughout the
     book. There are essentially three ways you can create a new data type:<ul id="9-ul_unf_nuw_ff">
      <li id="9-x-12">A <codeph id="9-x-13">type</codeph> declaration such as <codeph id="9-x-14">type GearCount = Int</codeph> merely
       creates a synonym for an existing type. The type system will do nothing to prevent you from
       using an <codeph id="9-x-15">Int</codeph> where you asked for a <codeph id="9-x-16">GearCount</codeph>. Using this
       can make your code more self-documenting.</li>
      <li id="9-x-17">A <codeph id="9-x-18">newtype</codeph> declaration such as <codeph id="9-x-19">newtype Make = Make Text</codeph>.
       In this case, you cannot accidently use a <codeph id="9-x-20">Text</codeph> in place of a
        <codeph id="9-x-21">Make</codeph>; the compiler will stop you. The newtype wrapper always disappears
       during compilation, and will introduce no overhead.</li>
      <li id="9-x-22">A <codeph id="9-x-23">data</codeph> declaration, such as <codeph id="9-x-24">Person</codeph> above. You can also
       create Algebraic Data Types (ADTs), such as <codeph id="9-x-25">data Vehicle = Bicycle GearCount | Car
        Make Model</codeph>.</li>
     </ul></dd>
   </dlentry>
   <dlentry id="9-x-26">
    <dt id="9-x-27">Data constructor</dt>
    <dd id="9-x-28">In our examples above, <codeph id="9-x-29">Person</codeph>, <codeph id="9-x-30">Make</codeph>,
      <codeph id="9-x-31">Bicycle</codeph>, and <codeph id="9-x-32">Car</codeph> are all data constructors.</dd>
   </dlentry>
   <dlentry id="9-x-33">
    <dt id="9-x-34">Type constructor</dt>
    <dd id="9-x-35">In our examples above, <codeph id="9-x-36">Person</codeph>, <codeph id="9-x-37">Make</codeph>, and
      <codeph id="9-x-38">Vehicle</codeph> are all type constructors.</dd>
   </dlentry>
   <dlentry id="9-x-39">
    <dt id="9-x-40">Type variables</dt>
    <dd id="9-x-41">Consider the data type <codeph id="9-x-42">data Maybe a = Just a | Nothing</codeph>. In this case,
      <codeph id="9-x-43">a</codeph> is a type variable.</dd>
   </dlentry>
  </dl>
 </conbody></concept><concept id="tools-10"><title>Tools</title><conbody>
  <p id="10-x-3">There are two main tools you'll need to Haskell development. The Glasgow Haskell Compiler (GHC)
   is the standard Haskell compiler, and the only one officially supported by Yesod. You'll also
   need Cabal, which is the standard Haskell build tool. Not only do we use Cabal for building our
   local code, but it can automatically download and install dependencies from Hackage, the Haskell
   package repository.</p>
  <p id="10-x-4">If you're on Windows or Mac, it is strongly recommended to download the <xref id="10-x-5" href="http://hackage.haskell.org/platform/" format="html" scope="external">Haskell
    Platform</xref>. On Linux, many distributions include the Haskell Platform in their
   repositories. On Debian-based systems, for example, you can get started by running <codeph>sudo
    apt-get install haskell-platform</codeph>. If your distribution does not include the Haskell
   Platform, you can install it manually by following the instructions on the Haskell Platform's
   page.</p>
  <p>One important tool you'll need to update is <cmdname>alex</cmdname>. The Haskell Platform
   includes version 2, while the Javascript minifier Yesod uses, <apiname>hjsmin</apiname>, requires
   version three. Be sure to <cmdname>cabal install alex</cmdname> after getting set up with the
   Haskell Platform, or you'll run into error messages about the
    <apiname>language-javascript</apiname> package.</p>
  <note>Some people like to live in the bleeding edge and install the latest version of GHC before
   it is available in the Haskell Platform. We try to keep Yesod up-to-date with all current
   versions of GHC, but we only officially support the Haskell Platform. If you do go the route of
   manually install GHC, here are a few notes:<ul id="10-ul_da4256c1-39b0-4276-8c64-d88825acb6d8">
    <li>You'll need to install some additional build tools, <cmdname>alex</cmdname> and
      <cmdname>happy</cmdname> in particular.</li>
    <li>Make sure to install all of the <xref id="10-x-12" href="http://www.vex.net/%7Etrebla/haskell/haskell-platform.xhtml" format="html" scope="external">required C libraries</xref>. On Debian-based systems, you would need to
     run:<codeblock id="10-x-13" outputclass="shell">sudo apt-get install libedit-dev libbsd-dev libgmp3-dev zlib1g-dev freeglut3-dev</codeblock>
    </li>
   </ul></note>
  <p id="10-x-14">Regardless of how you've installed your tools, you should sure to put <codeph id="10-x-15">cabal</codeph>'s
   bin folder in your <codeph id="10-x-16">PATH</codeph> variable. On Mac and Linux, this will be
    <codeph id="10-x-17">$HOME/.cabal/bin</codeph> and on Windows it will be
   <codeph id="10-x-18">%APPDATA%\cabal\bin</codeph>.</p>
  <p id="10-x-19"><codeph id="10-x-20">cabal</codeph> has lots of different options available, but for now, just try out two
   commands:</p>
  <ul id="10-ul_fwo_zrw_ff">
   <li id="10-x-21"><cmdname id="10-x-22">cabal update</cmdname> will download the most recent list of packages from
    Hackage.</li>
   <li id="10-x-23"><cmdname id="10-x-24">cabal install yesod</cmdname> will install Yesod and all its dependencies.</li>
  </ul>
  <note id="10-x-25">Many people in the community prefer to perform sandboxed builds of their Haskell
   packages, which prevents your install Yesod from breaking existing packages, or packages you
   install in the future from breaking your Yesod install. I won't go into details on how to use
   these in the book, but the two most commonly used tools are <xref id="10-x-26" href="http://hackage.haskell.org/package/cabal-dev" format="html" scope="external">cabal-dev</xref> and <xref id="10-x-27" href="http://hackage.haskell.org/package/virthualenv" format="html" scope="external">virthualenv</xref>.</note>
 </conbody></concept><concept id="language-pragmas-11"><title>Language Pragmas</title><conbody>
  <p id="11-x-3">GHC will run by default in something very close to Haskell98 mode. It also ships with a large
   number of language extensions, allowing more powerful type classes, syntax changes, and more.
   There are multiple ways to tell GHC to turn on these extensions. For most of the code snippets in
   this book, you'll see <term id="11-x-4">language pragmas</term>, which look like this:</p>
  <codeblock id="11-x-5" outputclass="haskell">{-# LANGUAGE MyLanguageExtension #-}</codeblock>
  <p id="11-x-6">These should always appear at the top of your source file. Additionally, there are two
   other common approaches:</p>
  <ul id="11-ul_ano_hnw_ff">
   <li id="11-x-7">On the GHC command line, pass an extra argument
    <userinput id="11-x-8">-XMyLanguageExtension</userinput>.</li>
   <li id="11-x-9">In your <codeph id="11-x-10">cabal</codeph> file, add an <codeph id="11-x-11">extensions</codeph> block.</li>
  </ul>
  <p id="11-x-12">I personally never use the GHC command line argument approach. It's a personal preference, but
   I like to have my settings clearly stated in a file. In general it's recommended to avoid putting
   extensions in your <codeph id="11-x-13">cabal</codeph> file; however, in the <xref id="11-x-14" href="scaffolding-and-the-site-template.dita#scaffolding-and-the-site-template-166" format="dita">Yesod scaffolded site</xref> we specifically use this approach to avoid the
   boilerplate of specifying the same language pragmas in every source file.</p>
  <p id="11-x-15">We'll end up using quite a few language extensions in this book (the scaffolding uses 11). We
   will not cover the meaning of all of them. Instead, please see the <xref id="11-x-16" href="http://www.haskell.org/ghc/docs/latest/html/users_guide/ghc-language-features.html" format="html" scope="external">GHC documentation</xref>.</p>
 </conbody></concept><concept id="overloaded-strings-12"><title>Overloaded Strings</title><conbody>
  <p id="12-x-3">What's the type of <codeph id="12-x-4">"hello"</codeph>? Traditionally, it's <codeph id="12-x-5">String</codeph>, which
   is defined as <codeph id="12-x-6">type String = [Char]</codeph>. Unfortunately, there are a number of
   limitations with this:</p>
  <ul id="12-ul_nev_fdx_ff">
   <li id="12-x-7">It's a very inefficient implementation of textual data. We need to allocate extra memory for
    each cons cell, plus the characters themselves each take up a full machine word.</li>
   <li id="12-x-8">Sometimes we have string-like data that's not actually text, such as
     <codeph id="12-x-9">ByteString</codeph>s and HTML.</li>
  </ul>
  <p id="12-x-10">To work around these limitations, GHC has a language extension called
    <codeph id="12-x-11">OverloadedStrings</codeph>. When enabled, literal strings no longer have the monomorphic
   type <codeph id="12-x-12">String</codeph>; instead, they have the type <codeph id="12-x-13">IsString a =&gt; a</codeph>, where
    <codeph id="12-x-14">IsString</codeph> is defined as:</p>
  <codeblock id="12-x-15" outputclass="haskell">class IsString a where
    fromString :: String -&gt; a</codeblock>
  <p id="12-x-16">There are <codeph id="12-x-17">IsString</codeph> instances available for a number of types in Haskell, such
   as <codeph id="12-x-18">Text</codeph> (a much more efficient packed <codeph id="12-x-19">String</codeph> type),
    <codeph id="12-x-20">ByteString</codeph>, and <codeph id="12-x-21">Html</codeph>. Virtually every example in this book
   will assume that this language extension is turned on.</p>
  <p id="12-x-22">Unfortunately, there is one drawback to this extension: it can sometimes confuse GHC's type
   checker. Imagine we have:</p>
  <codeblock id="12-x-23" outputclass="haskell">{-# LANGUAGE OverloadedStrings, TypeSynonymInstances, FlexibleInstances #-}
import Data.Text (Text)

class DoSomething a where
    something :: a -&gt; IO ()

instance DoSomething String where
    something _ = putStrLn "String"

instance DoSomething Text where
    something _ = putStrLn "Text"

myFunc :: IO ()
myFunc = something "hello"</codeblock>
  <p id="12-x-24">Will the program print out <codeph id="12-x-25">String</codeph> or <codeph id="12-x-26">Text</codeph>? It's not clear. So
   instead, you'll need to give an explicit type annotation to specify whether
    <codeph id="12-x-27">"hello"</codeph> should be treated as a <codeph id="12-x-28">String</codeph> or
   <codeph id="12-x-29">Text</codeph>.</p>
 </conbody></concept><concept id="type-families-13"><title>Type Families</title><conbody>
  <p id="13-x-3">The basic idea of a type family is to state some association between two different types.
   Suppose we want to write a function that will safely take the first element of a list. But we
   don't want it to work just on lists; we'd like it to treat a <codeph id="13-x-4">ByteString</codeph> like a
   list of <codeph id="13-x-5">Word8</codeph>s. To do so, we need to introduce some <term id="13-x-6">associated type</term>
   to specify what the contents of a certain type are.</p>
  <codeblock id="13-x-7" outputclass="haskell">{-# LANGUAGE TypeFamilies, OverloadedStrings #-}
import Data.Word (Word8)
import qualified Data.ByteString as S
import Data.ByteString.Char8 () -- get an orphan IsString instance

class SafeHead a where
    type Content a
    safeHead :: a -&gt; Maybe (Content a)

instance SafeHead [a] where
    type Content [a] = a
    safeHead [] = Nothing
    safeHead (x:_) = Just x

instance SafeHead S.ByteString where
    type Content S.ByteString = Word8
    safeHead bs
        | S.null bs = Nothing
        | otherwise = Just $ S.head bs

main :: IO ()
main = do
    print $ safeHead ("" :: String)
    print $ safeHead ("hello" :: String)

    print $ safeHead ("" :: S.ByteString)
    print $ safeHead ("hello" :: S.ByteString)</codeblock>
  <p id="13-x-8">The new syntax is the ability to place a <codeph id="13-x-9">type</codeph> inside of a
    <codeph id="13-x-10">class</codeph> and <codeph id="13-x-11">instance</codeph>. We can also use <codeph id="13-x-12">data</codeph>
   instead, which will create a new datatype instead of reference an existing one.</p>
  <note id="13-x-13">There are other ways to use associated types outside the context of a typeclass. However, in
   Yesod, all of our associated types are in fact part of a type class. For more information on type
   families, see <xref id="13-x-14" href="http://www.haskell.org/haskellwiki/GHC/Type_families" format="html" scope="external">the Haskell wiki page</xref>.</note>
 </conbody></concept><concept id="template-haskell-14"><title>Template Haskell</title><conbody>
  <p id="14-x-3">Template Haskell (TH) is an approach to <i id="14-x-4">code generation</i>. We use it in Yesod in a number
   of places to reduce boilerplate, and to ensure that the generated code is correct. Template
   Haskell is essentially Haskell which generates a Haskell Abstract Syntax Tree (AST).</p>
  <note id="14-x-5">There's actually more power in TH than that, as it can actually introspect code. We don't
   use these facilities in Yesod, however.</note>
  <p id="14-x-6">Writing TH code can be tricky, and unfortunately there isn't very much type safety involved.
   You can easily write TH that will generate code that won't compile. This is only an issue for the
   developers of Yesod, not for its users. During development, we use a large collection of unit
   tests to ensure that the generated code is correct. As a user, all you need to do is call these
   already existing functions. For example, to include an externally defined Hamlet template, you
   can write:</p>
  <codeblock id="14-x-7" outputclass="haskell">$(hamletFile "myfile.hamlet")</codeblock>
  <p id="14-x-8">(Hamlet is discussed in the <xref id="14-x-9" href="shakespearean-templates.dita#shakespearean-templates-27" format="dita">Shakespeare chapter</xref>.) The dollar sign immediately followed by parantheses
   tell GHC that what follows is a Template Haskell function. The code inside is then run by the
   compiler and generates a Haskell AST, which is then compiled. And yes, it's even possible to
    <xref id="14-x-10" href="http://www.yesodweb.com/blog/2010/09/yo-dawg-template-haskell" format="html" scope="external">go meta with this</xref>.</p>
  <p id="14-x-11">A nice trick is that TH code is allowed to perform arbitrary <codeph id="14-x-12">IO</codeph> actions, and
   therefore we can place some input in external files and have it parsed at compile time. One
   example usage is to have compile-time checked HTML, CSS, and Javascript templates.</p>
  <p id="14-x-13">If your Template Haskell code is being used to generate declarations, and is being placed at
   the top level of our file, we can leave off the dollar sign and parentheses. In other words:</p>
  <codeblock id="14-x-14" outputclass="haskell">{-# LANGUAGE TemplateHaskell #-}

-- Normal function declaration, nothing special
myFunction = ...

-- Include some TH code
$(myThCode)

-- Or equivalently
myThCode</codeblock>
  <p id="14-x-15">It can be useful to see what code is being generated by Template Haskell for you. To do so, you
   should use the <codeph id="14-x-16">-ddump-splices</codeph> GHC option.</p>
  <note id="14-x-17">There are many other features of Template Haskell not covered here. For more information,
   see the <xref id="14-x-18" href="http://www.haskell.org/haskellwiki/Template_Haskell" format="html" scope="external">Haskell wiki page</xref>.</note>
 </conbody></concept><concept id="quasi-quotes-15"><title>QuasiQuotes</title><conbody>
  <p id="15-x-3">QuasiQuotes (QQ) are a minor extension of Template Haskell that let us embed arbitrary content
   within our Haskell source files. For example, we mentioned previously the
    <codeph id="15-x-4">hamletFile</codeph> TH function, which reads the template contents from an external
   file. We also have a quasi-quoter named <codeph id="15-x-5">hamlet</codeph> that takes the content
   inline:</p>
  <codeblock id="15-x-6" outputclass="haskell">{-# LANGUAGE QuasiQuotes #-}

[hamlet|&lt;p&gt;This is quasi-quoted Hamlet.|]</codeblock>
  <p id="15-x-7">The syntax is set off using square brackets and pipes. The name of the quasi-quoter is given
   between the opening bracket and the first pipe, and the content is given between the pipes.</p>
  <p id="15-x-8">Throughout the book, we will often times use the QQ-approach over a TH-powered external file
   since the former is simpler to copy-and-paste. However, in production, external files are
   recommended for all but the shortest of inputs as it gives a nice separation of the non-Haskell
   syntax from your Haskell code.</p>
 </conbody></concept><concept id="summary-16"><title>Summary</title><conbody>
  <p id="16-x-3">You don't need to be an expert in Haskell to use Yesod, a basic familiarity will suffice. This
   chapter hopefully gave you just enough extra information to feel more comfortable following the
   rest of the book.</p>
 </conbody></concept></concept>