<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE concept PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Concept//EN" "concept.dtd">
<concept id="internationalization-178"><title>Internationalization</title><conbody>
        <p id="178-x-3">Users expect our software to speak their language. Unfortunately for us, there
            will likely be more than one language involved. While doing simple string replacement
            isn't too involved, correctly dealing with all the grammar issues can be tricky. After
            all, who wants to see "List 1 file(s)" from a program output?</p>
        <p id="178-x-4">But a real i18n solution needs to do more than just provide a means of achieving the
            correct output. It needs to make this process easy for both the programmer and the
            translator and relatively error-proof. Yesod's answer to the problem gives you:</p>
        <ul id="178-ul_bqf_mdz_ae">
            <li id="178-x-5">Intelligent guessing of the user's desired language based on request headers, with
                the ability to override.</li>
            <li id="178-x-6">A simple syntax for giving translations which requires no Haskell knowledge. (After
                all, most translators aren't programmers.)</li>
            <li id="178-x-7">The ability to bring in the full power of Haskell for tricky grammar issues as
                necessary, along with a default selection of helper functions to cover most
                needs.</li>
            <li id="178-x-8">Absolutely no issues at all with word order.</li>
        </ul>
    </conbody><concept id="synopsis-179"><title>Synopsis</title><conbody>
  <codeblock id="179-x-3" outputclass="messages">-- @messages/en.msg
Hello: Hello
EnterItemCount: I would like to buy: 
Purchase: Purchase
ItemCount count@Int: You have purchased #{showInt count} #{plural count "item" "items"}.
SwitchLanguage: Switch language to: 
Switch: Switch</codeblock>
  <codeblock id="179-x-4" outputclass="messages">-- @messages/he.msg
Hello: שלום
EnterItemCount: אני רוצה לקנות: 
Purchase: קנה
ItemCount count: קנית #{showInt count} #{plural count "דבר" "דברים"}.
SwitchLanguage: החלף שפה ל:
Switch: החלף</codeblock>
  <codeblock id="179-x-5" outputclass="haskell">-- @i18n-synopsis.hs
{-# LANGUAGE OverloadedStrings, QuasiQuotes, TemplateHaskell, TypeFamilies,
    MultiParamTypeClasses #-}
import Yesod

data I18N = I18N

mkMessage "I18N" "messages" "en"

plural :: Int -&gt; String -&gt; String -&gt; String
plural 1 x _ = x
plural _ _ y = y

showInt :: Int -&gt; String
showInt = show

instance Yesod I18N

instance RenderMessage I18N FormMessage where
    renderMessage _ _ = defaultFormMessage

mkYesod "I18N" [parseRoutes|
/ RootR GET
/buy BuyR GET
/lang LangR POST
|]

getRootR :: Handler RepHtml
getRootR = defaultLayout [whamlet|
&lt;h1&gt;_{MsgHello}
&lt;form action=@{BuyR}&gt;
    _{MsgEnterItemCount}
    &lt;input type=text name=count&gt;
    &lt;input type=submit value=_{MsgPurchase}&gt;
&lt;form action=@{LangR} method=post&gt;
    _{MsgSwitchLanguage}
    &lt;select name=lang&gt;
        &lt;option value=en&gt;English
        &lt;option value=he&gt;Hebrew
    &lt;input type=submit value=_{MsgSwitch}&gt;
|]

getBuyR :: Handler RepHtml
getBuyR = do
    count &lt;- runInputGet $ ireq intField "count"
    defaultLayout [whamlet|
&lt;p&gt;_{MsgItemCount count}
|]

postLangR :: Handler ()
postLangR = do
    lang &lt;- runInputPost $ ireq textField "lang"
    setLanguage lang
    redirect RootR

main :: IO ()
main = warpDebug 3000 I18N</codeblock>
 </conbody></concept><concept id="overview-180"><title>Overview</title><conbody>
  <p id="180-x-3">Most existing i18n solutions out there, like gettext or Java message bundles, work on the
   principle of string lookups. Usually some form of printf-interpolation is used to interpolate
   variables into the strings. In Yesod, as you might guess, we instead rely on types. This gives us
   all of our normal advantages, such as the compiler automatically catching mistakes.</p>
  <p id="180-x-4">Let's take a concrete example. Suppose our application has two things it wants to say
   to a user: say hello, and state how many users are logged into the system. This can be modeled
   with a sum type:</p>
  <codeblock id="180-x-5" outputclass="haskell">data MyMessage = MsgHello | MsgUsersLoggedIn Int</codeblock>
  <p id="180-x-6">I can also write a function to turn this datatype into an English representation:</p>
  <codeblock id="180-x-7" outputclass="haskell">toEnglish :: MyMessage -&gt; String
toEnglish MsgHello = "Hello there!"
toEnglish (MsgUsersLoggedIn 1) = "There is 1 user logged in."
toEnglish (MsgUsersLoggedIn i) = "There are " ++ show i ++ " users logged in."</codeblock>
  <p id="180-x-8">We can also write similar functions for other languages. The advantage to this
   inside-Haskell approach is that we have the full power of Haskell for addressing tricky grammar
   issues, especially pluralization.</p>
  <note id="180-x-9">You may think pluralization isn't so complicated: you have one version for 1 item, and
   another for any other count. That might be true in English, but it's not true for every language.
   Russian, for example, has six different forms, and you need to use some modulus logic to
   determine which one to use.</note>
  <p id="180-x-10">The downside, however, is that you have to write all of this inside of Haskell, which won't be
   very translator-friendly. To solve this, Yesod introduces the concept of message files. We'll
   cover that in a little bit.</p>
  <p id="180-x-11">Assuming we have this full set of translation functions, how do we go about using
   them? What we need is a new function to wrap them all up together, and then choose the
   appropriate translation function based on the user's selected language. Once we have that, Yesod
   can automatically choose the most relevant render function and call it on the values you
   provide.</p>
  <p id="180-x-12">In order to simplify things a bit, Hamlet has a special interpolation syntax,
    <codeph id="180-x-13">_{...}</codeph>, which handles all the calls to the render functions. And in order to
   associate a render function with your application, you use the <codeph id="180-x-14">YesodMessage</codeph>
   typeclass.</p>
 </conbody></concept><concept id="message-files-181"><title>Message files</title><conbody>
  <p id="181-x-3">The simplest approach to creating translations is via <term id="181-x-4">message
    files</term>. The setup is simple: there is a single folder containing all of your translation
   files, with a single file for each language. Each file is named based on its language code, e.g.
    <filepath id="181-x-5">en.msg</filepath>. And each line in a file handles one phrase, which
   correlates to a single constructor in your message data type.</p>
  <note id="181-x-11">The scaffolded site already includes a fully configured message folder.</note>
  <p id="181-x-6">So firstly, a word about language codes. There are really two choices available: using a
   two-letter language code, or a language-LOCALE code. For example, when I load up a page in my web
   browser, it sends two language codes: en-US and en. What my browser is saying is "if you have
   American English, I like that the most. If you have English, I'll take that instead."</p>
  <p id="181-x-7">So which format should you use in your application? Most likely two-letter codes,
   unless you are actually creating separate translations by locale. This ensures that someone
   asking for Canadian English will still see your English. Behind the scenes, Yesod will add the
   two-letter codes where relevant. For example, suppose a user has the following language
   list:<codeblock id="181-x-12" outputclass="langlist">pt-BR, es, he</codeblock>What this means is "I like Brazilian Porteguese, then
   Spanish, and then Hebrew." Suppose your application provides the languages pt (general
   Porteguese) and English, with English as the default. Strictly following the user's language list
   would result in the user being served English. Instead, Yesod translates that list
   into:<codeblock id="181-x-13" outputclass="langlist">pt-BR, es, he, pt</codeblock>In other words: unless you're giving different
   translations based on locale, just stick to the two-letter language codes.</p>
  <p id="181-x-8">Now what about these message files? The syntax should be very familiar after your work
   with Hamlet and Persistent. The line starts off with the name of the message. Since this is a
   data constructor, it must start with a capital letter. Next, you can have individual parameters,
   which must be given as lower case. These will be arguments to the data constructor.</p>
  <p id="181-x-9">The argument list is terminated by a colon, and then followed by the translated string, which
   allows usage of our typical variable interpolation syntax <codeph id="181-x-10">#{myVar}</codeph>. By referring
   to the parameters defined before the colon, and using translation helper functions to deal with
   issues like pluralization, you can create all the translated messages you need.</p>
 </conbody><concept id="message-types-182"><title>Specifying types</title><conbody>
  <p id="182-x-3">Since we will be creating a datatype out of our message specifications, each parameter
   to a data constructor must be given a data type. We use a @-syntax for this. For example, to
   create the datatype <codeph id="182-x-4">data MyMessage = MsgHello | MsgSayAge Int</codeph>, we would
   write:</p>
  <codeblock id="182-x-5" outputclass="messages">Hello: Hi there!
SayAge age@Int: Your age is: #{show age}</codeblock>
  <p id="182-x-6">But there are two problems with this:</p>
  <ol id="182-ol_cvd_tjd_d2">
   <li id="182-x-7">It's not very DRY (don't repeat yourself) to have to specify this datatype in every
    file.</li>
   <li id="182-x-8">Translators will be confused having to specify these datatypes.</li>
  </ol>
  <p id="182-x-9">So instead, the type specification is only required in the main language file. This is
   specified as the third argument in the <codeph id="182-x-10">mkMessage</codeph> function. This also specifies
   what the backup language will be, to be used when none of the languages provided by your
   application match the user's language list.</p>
 </conbody></concept></concept><concept id="typeclass-183"><title>RenderMessage typeclass</title><conbody>
  <p id="183-x-3">Your call to <codeph id="183-x-4">mkMessage</codeph> creates an instance of the
    <codeph id="183-x-14">RenderMessage</codeph> typeclass, which is the core of Yesod's i18n. It is defined
   as:</p>
  <codeblock id="183-x-5" outputclass="haskell">class RenderMessage master message where
    renderMessage :: master
                  -&gt; [Text] -- ^ languages
                  -&gt; message
                  -&gt; Text </codeblock>
  <p id="183-x-6">Notice that there are two parameters to the <codeph id="183-x-15">RenderMessage</codeph> class: the
   master site and the message type. In theory, we could skip the master type here, but that would
   mean that every site would need to have the same set of translations for each message type. When
   it comes to shared libraries like forms, that would not be a workable solution.</p>
  <p id="183-x-7">The <codeph id="183-x-16">renderMessage</codeph> function takes a parameter for each of the class's
   type parameters: master and message. The extra parameter is a list of languages the user will
   accept, in descending order of priority. The method then returns a user-ready
    <codeph id="183-x-17">Text</codeph> that can be displayed.</p>
  <p id="183-x-8">A simple instance of <codeph id="183-x-18">RenderMessage</codeph> may involve no actual translation
   of strings; instead, it will just display the same value for every language. For example:</p>
  <codeblock id="183-x-9" outputclass="haskell">data MyMessage = Hello | Greet Text
instance RenderMessage MyApp MyMessage where
    renderMessage _ _ Hello = "Hello"
    renderMessage _ _ (Greet name) = "Welcome, " &lt;&gt; name &lt;&gt; "!"</codeblock>
  <p id="183-x-10">Notice how we ignore the first two parameters to <codeph id="183-x-19">renderMessage</codeph>. We
   can now extend this to support multiple languages:</p>
  <codeblock id="183-x-11" outputclass="haskell">renderEn Hello = "Hello"
renderEn (Greet name) = "Welcome, " &lt;&gt; name &lt;&gt; "!"
renderHe Hello = "שלום"
renderHe (Greet name) = "ברוכים הבאים, " &lt;&gt; name &lt;&gt; "!"
instance RenderMessage MyApp MyMessage where
    renderMessage _ ("en":_) = renderEn
    renderMessage _ ("he":_) = renderHe
    renderMessage master (_:langs) = renderMessage master langs
    renderMessage _ [] = renderEn</codeblock>
  <p id="183-x-12">The idea here is fairly straight-forward: we define helper functions to support each language.
   We then add a clause to catch each of those languages in the renderMessage definition. We then
   have two final cases: if no languages matched, continue checking with the next language in the
   user's priority list. If we've exhausted all languages the user specified, then use the default
   language (in our case, English).</p>
  <p id="183-x-13">But odds are that you will never need to worry about writing this stuff manually, as the
   message file interface does all this for you. But it's always a good idea to have an
   understanding of what's going on under the surface.</p>
 </conbody></concept><concept id="interpolation-184"><title>Interpolation</title><conbody>
  <p id="184-x-3">One way to use your new <codeph id="184-x-11">RenderMessage</codeph> instance would be to directly
   call the <codeph id="184-x-4">renderMessage</codeph> function. This would work, but it's a bit
   tedious: you need to pass in the foundation value and the language list manually. Instead, Hamlet
   provides a specialized i18n interpolation, which looks like <codeph id="184-x-5">_{...}</codeph>.</p>
  <note id="184-x-6">Why the underscore? Underscore is already a well-established character for i18n, as it is
   used in the gettext library.</note>
  <p id="184-x-7">Hamlet will then automatically translate that to a call to <codeph id="184-x-8">renderMessage</codeph>. Once Hamlet gets the output <codeph id="184-x-12">Text</codeph> value, it uses the
    <codeph id="184-x-9">toHtml</codeph> function to produce an <codeph id="184-x-10">Html</codeph> value,
   meaning that any special characters (&lt;, &amp;, &gt;) will be automatically escaped.</p>
 </conbody></concept><concept id="phrases-not-words-185"><title>Phrases, not words</title><conbody>
  <p id="185-x-3">As a final note, I'd just like to give some general i18n advice. Let's say you have an
   application for selling turtles. You're going to use the word "turtle" in multiple places, like
   "You have added 4 turtles to your cart." and "You have purchased 4 turtles, congratulations!" As
   a programmer, you'll immediately notice the code reuse potential: we have the phrase "4 turtles"
   twice. So you might structure your message file as:</p>
  <codeblock id="185-x-4" outputclass="message">AddStart: You have added
AddEnd: to your cart.
PurchaseStart: You have purchased
PurchaseEnd: , congratulations!
Turtles count@Int: #{show count} #{plural count "turtle" "turtles"}</codeblock>
  <p id="185-x-5">STOP RIGHT THERE! This is all well and good from a programming perspective, but
   translations are <i id="185-x-6">not</i> programming. There are a many things that could go wrong
   with this, such as:</p>
  <ul id="185-ul_425_m2m_f2">
   <li id="185-x-7">Some languages might put "to your cart" before "You have added."</li>
   <li id="185-x-8">Maybe "added" will be constructed differently depending whether you added 1 or more
    turtles.</li>
   <li id="185-x-9">There are a bunch of whitespace issues as well.</li>
  </ul>
  <p id="185-x-10">So the general rule is: translate entire phrases, not just words.</p>
 </conbody></concept></concept>