<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE concept PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Concept//EN" "concept.dtd">
<concept id="scaffolding-and-the-site-template-166"><title>Scaffolding and the Site Template</title><conbody>
        <p id="166-x-3">So you're tired of running small examples, and ready to write a real site? Then you're at
            the right chapter. Even with the entire Yesod library at your fingertips, there are
            still a lot of steps you need to go through to get a production-quality site setup:</p>
        <ul id="166-ul_nys_vtf_42">
            <li id="166-x-4">Config file parsing</li>
            <li id="166-x-5">Signal handling (*nix)</li>
            <li id="166-x-6">More efficient static file serving</li>
            <li id="166-x-7">A good file layout</li>
        </ul>
        <p id="166-x-8">The scaffolded site is a combination of many Yesoders' best practices combined together
            into a ready-to-use skeleton for your sites. It is highly recommended for all sites.
            This chapter will explain the overall structure of the scaffolding, how to use it, and
            some of its less-than-obvious features.</p>
        <p>For the most part, this chapter will not contain code samples. It is recommended that you
            follow along with an actual scaffolded site.</p>
        <note id="166-x-9">Due to the nature of the scaffolded site, it is the most fluid component of Yesod, and
            can change from version to version. It is possible that the information in this chapter
            is slightly outdated.</note></conbody><concept id="how-to-scaffold-167"><title>How to Scaffold</title><conbody>
  <p id="167-x-3">The <apiname id="167-x-4">yesod</apiname> package installs both a library and an
   executable (conveniently named <cmdname id="167-x-5">yesod</cmdname> as well). This executable
   provides a few commands (run <cmdname id="167-x-17">yesod</cmdname> by itself to get a list). In order to
   generate a scaffolding, the command is <cmdname id="167-x-6">yesod init</cmdname>. This will start a
   question-and-answer process where you get to provide basic details (your name, the project name,
   etc). After answering the questions, you will have a site template in a subfolder with the name
   of your project.</p>
  <p id="167-x-7">The most important of these questions is the database backend. You get four choices here:
   SQLite, PostgreSQL, MongoDB, and tiny. tiny is not a database backend; instead, it is specifying
   that you do not want to use any database. This option also turns off a few extra dependencies,
   giving you a leaner overall site. The remainder of this chapter will focus on the scaffoldings
   for one of the database backends. There will be minor differences for the tiny backend.</p>
  <p id="167-x-8">After creating your files, the scaffolder will print a message about getting started.
   It gives two sets of options for commands: one using <cmdname id="167-x-18">cabal</cmdname>, and the other
   using <cmdname id="167-x-19">cabal-dev</cmdname>. <cmdname id="167-x-20">cabal-dev</cmdname> is basically a wrapper around
   cabal which causes all dependencies to be built in a sandbox. Using it is a good way to ensure
   that installing other packages will not break your site setup. It is strongly recommended. If you
   don't have <cmdname id="167-x-21">cabal-dev</cmdname>, you can install it by running <cmdname id="167-x-9">cabal
    install cabal-dev</cmdname>.</p>
  <p id="167-x-10">Note that you really do need to use the <cmdname id="167-x-11">cabal install
    --only-dependencies</cmdname> (or <cmdname id="167-x-12">cabal-dev install
    --only-dependencies</cmdname>) command. Most likely, you do not yet have all the dependencies in
   place needed by your site. For example, none of the database backends, nor the Javascript
   minifier (<apiname id="167-x-13">hjsmin</apiname>) are installed when installing the <codeph id="167-x-22">yesod</codeph> package.</p>
  <p id="167-x-14">Finally, to launch your development site, you would use <cmdname id="167-x-15">yesod
    devel</cmdname> (or <cmdname id="167-x-16">yesod --dev devel</cmdname>). This site will
   automatically rebuild and reload whenever you change your code.</p>
 </conbody></concept><concept id="file-structure-168"><title>File Structure</title><conbody>
  <p id="168-x-3">The scaffolded site is built as a fully cabalized Haskell package. In addition to
   source files, config files, templates, and static files are produced as well.</p>
 </conbody><concept id="cabal-file-169"><title>Cabal file</title><conbody>
  <p id="169-x-3">Whether directly using <cmdname id="169-x-4">cabal</cmdname>, or indirectly using <cmdname id="169-x-5">yesod devel</cmdname>, building your code will always go through the cabal file. If
      you open the file, you'll see that there are both library and executable blocks. Only one of
      these is built at a time, depending on the value of the <codeph id="169-x-6">library-only</codeph>
      flag. If <codeph id="169-x-7">library-only</codeph> is turned on, then the library is built, which
      is how <cmdname id="169-x-8">yesod devel</cmdname> calls your app. Otherwise, the executable is
      built.</p>
    <p id="169-x-9">The <codeph id="169-x-10">library-only</codeph> flag should only be used by
        <cmdname id="169-x-25">yesod devel</cmdname>; you should never be explicitly passing it into
        <cmdname id="169-x-26">cabal</cmdname>. There is an additional flag, <codeph id="169-x-11">dev</codeph>, that
      allows cabal to build an executable, but turns on some of the same features as
      the library-only flag, i.e., no optimizations and reload versions of the Shakespearean
      template functions.</p>
  <p id="169-x-12">In general, you will build as follows:</p>
    <ul id="169-ul_4wr_4wg_42">
      <li id="169-x-13">When developing, use <cmdname id="169-x-27">yesod devel</cmdname> exclusively.</li>
      <li id="169-x-14">When building a production build, perform <cmdname id="169-x-15">cabal clean
          &amp;&amp; cabal configure &amp;&amp; cabal build</cmdname>. This will produce an
        optimized executable in your <filepath id="169-x-28">dist</filepath> folder.<note id="169-x-16">In the past we
          had a <codeph id="169-x-29">-fproduction</codeph> flag. If you produced a scaffolded site in the past,
          you may have to use this flag to get a production build.</note></li>
    </ul>
    <p id="169-x-17">You'll also notice that we specify all language extensions in the cabal file. The
      extensions are specified <i id="169-x-18">twice</i>: once for the executable, and once for the
      library. If you add any extensions to the list, add it to both places.</p>
    <p id="169-x-19">You might be surprised to see the <codeph id="169-x-20">NoImplicitPrelude</codeph> extension. We turn this
      on since the site includes its own module, <codeph id="169-x-21">Import</codeph>, with a few changes to the
      Prelude that make working with Yesod a little more convenient.</p>
    <p id="169-x-22">The last thing to note is the exported-modules list. If you add any modules to your
      application, you <b id="169-x-23">must</b> update this list to get yesod devel to work correctly.
      Unfortunately, neither Cabal nor GHC will give you a warning if you forgot to make this
      update, and instead you'll get a very scary-looking error message from yesod devel.<note id="169-x-24">One of our planned improvements to <cmdname id="169-x-30">yesod devel</cmdname> is to check if
        there are any missing modules.</note></p>
 </conbody></concept><concept id="routes-entities-model-170"><title>Routes and entities</title><conbody>
  <p id="170-x-3">Multiple times in this book, you've seen a comment like "We're declaring our routes/entities
   with quasiquotes for convenience. In a production site, you should use an external file." The
   scaffolding uses such an external file.</p>
  <p id="170-x-4">Routes are defined in <filepath id="170-x-5">config/routes</filepath>, and entities in
    <filepath id="170-x-6">config/models</filepath>. They have the exact same syntax as the quasiquoting
   you've seen throughout the book, and <cmdname id="170-x-15">yesod devel</cmdname> knows to automatically
   recompile the appropriate modules when these files change.</p>
  <p id="170-x-7">The <filepath id="170-x-16">models</filepath> files is referenced by <codeph id="170-x-8">Model.hs</codeph>. You are free to declare whatever you like in this file, but here are some
   guidelines:</p>
  <ul id="170-ul_gui_tyg_oe">
   <li id="170-x-9">Any data types used in <filepath id="170-x-17">entities</filepath>
    <b id="170-x-10">must</b> be imported/declared in <filepath id="170-x-18">Model.hs</filepath>, above the <codeph id="170-x-11">persistFile</codeph> call.</li>
   <li id="170-x-12">Helper utilities should either be declared in <codeph id="170-x-13">Import.hs</codeph>
    or, if very model-centric, in a file within the <codeph id="170-x-14">Model</codeph> folder and
    imported into <filepath id="170-x-19">Import.hs</filepath>.</li>
  </ul>
 </conbody></concept><concept id="foundation-application-171"><title>Foundation and Application modules</title><conbody>
  <p id="171-x-3">The <codeph id="171-x-4">mkYesod</codeph> function which we have used throughout the book declares a few
   things:</p>
  <ul id="171-ul_ajc_dzg_oe">
   <li id="171-x-5">Route type</li>
   <li id="171-x-6">Route render function</li>
   <li id="171-x-7">Dispatch function</li>
  </ul>
  <p id="171-x-8">The dispatch function refers to all of the handler functions, and therefore all of those must
   either be defined in the same file as the dispatch function, or be imported by the dispatch
   function.</p>
  <p id="171-x-9">Meanwhile, the handler functions will almost certainly refer to the route type. Therefore,
    <i id="171-x-10">they</i> must be either in the same file where the route type is defined, or must import that
   file. If you follow the logic here, your entire application must essentially live in a single
   file!</p>
  <p id="171-x-11">Clearly this isn't what we want. So instead of using <codeph id="171-x-12">mkYesod</codeph>, the scaffolding
   site uses a decomposed version of the function. <codeph id="171-x-13">Foundation</codeph> calls
    <codeph id="171-x-14">mkYesodData</codeph>, which declares the route type and render function. Since it does
   not declare the dispatch function, the handler functions need not be in scope.
    <codeph id="171-x-15">Import.hs</codeph> imports <codeph id="171-x-16">Foundation.hs</codeph>, and all the handler modules
   import <codeph id="171-x-17">Import.hs</codeph>.</p>
  <p id="171-x-18">In <codeph id="171-x-19">Application.hs</codeph>, we call <codeph id="171-x-20">mkYesodDispatch</codeph>, which creates our
   dispatch function. For this to work, all handler functions must be in scope, so be sure to add an
   import statement for any new handler modules you create.</p>
  <p id="171-x-21">Other than that, <filepath id="171-x-32">Application.hs</filepath> is pretty simple. It provides
   two functions: <codeph id="171-x-33">withDevelAppPort</codeph> is used by <cmdname id="171-x-22">yesod
    devel</cmdname> to launch your app, and <codeph id="171-x-23">getApplication</codeph> is used by the
   executable to launch.</p>
  <p id="171-x-24"><filepath id="171-x-34">Foundation.hs</filepath> is much more exciting. It:</p>
  <ul id="171-ul_ero_hah_oe">
   <li id="171-x-25">Declares your foundation datatype</li>
   <li id="171-x-26">Declares a number of instances, such as <codeph id="171-x-35">Yesod</codeph>,
     <codeph id="171-x-36">YesodAuth</codeph>, and <codeph id="171-x-37">YesodPersist</codeph></li>
   <li id="171-x-27">Imports the messages files. If you look for the line starting with <codeph id="171-x-28">mkMessage</codeph>, you will see that it specifies the folder containing the messages
     (<filepath id="171-x-29">messages</filepath>) and the default language (en, for English).</li>
  </ul>
  <p id="171-x-30">This is the right file for adding extra instances for your foundation, such as
    <codeph id="171-x-38">YesodAuthEmail</codeph> or <codeph id="171-x-39">YesodBreadcrumbs</codeph>.</p>
  <p id="171-x-31">We'll be referring back to this file later, as we discussed some of the special
   implementations of <codeph id="171-x-40">Yesod</codeph> typeclass methods.</p>
 </conbody></concept><concept id="import-172"><title>Import</title><conbody>
  <p id="172-x-3">The <codeph id="172-x-12">Import</codeph> module was born out of a few commonly recurring
   patterns.</p>
  <ul id="172-ul_skn_hbh_oe">
   <li id="172-x-4">I want to define some helper functions (maybe the <codeph id="172-x-5">&lt;&gt; = mappend</codeph> operator)
    to be used by all handlers.</li>
   <li id="172-x-6">I'm always adding the same five import statements (<codeph id="172-x-13">Data.Text</codeph>,
     <codeph id="172-x-14">Control.Applicative</codeph>, etc) to every handler module.</li>
   <li id="172-x-7">I want to make sure I never use some evil function (<codeph id="172-x-15">head</codeph>,
     <codeph id="172-x-16">readFile</codeph>, ...) from <codeph id="172-x-17">Prelude</codeph>.<note id="172-x-8">Yes, evil is
     hyperbole. If you're wondering why I listed those functions as bad: <codeph id="172-x-9">head</codeph> is partial, and throws exceptions on an empty list, and <codeph id="172-x-10">readFile</codeph> uses lazy I/O, which doesn't close file handles quickly enough. Also,
      <codeph id="172-x-18">readFile</codeph> uses <codeph id="172-x-19">String</codeph> instead of
     <codeph id="172-x-20">Text</codeph>.</note></li>
  </ul>
  <p id="172-x-11">The solution is to turn on the <codeph id="172-x-21">NoImplicitPrelude</codeph> language extension,
   re-export the parts of <codeph id="172-x-22">Prelude</codeph> we want, add in all the other stuff we want,
   define our own functions as well, and then import this file in all handlers.</p>
 </conbody></concept><concept id="handlers-173"><title>Handler modules</title><conbody>
  <p id="173-x-3">Handler modules should go inside the <filepath id="173-x-13">Handler</filepath> folder. The site
   template includes one module: <filepath id="173-x-14">Handler/Root.hs</filepath>. How you split up your handler
   functions into individual modules is your decision, but a good rule of thumb is:</p>
  <ul id="173-ul_esf_zbh_oe">
   <li id="173-x-4">Different methods for the same route should go in the same file, e.g.
     <codeph id="173-x-15">getBlogR</codeph> and <codeph id="173-x-16">postBlogR</codeph>.</li>
   <li id="173-x-5">Related routes can also usually go in the same file, e.g.,
     <codeph id="173-x-17">getPeopleR</codeph> and <codeph id="173-x-18">getPersonR</codeph>.</li>
  </ul>
  <p id="173-x-6">Of course, it's entirely up to you. When you add a new handler file, make sure you do the
   following:</p>
  <ul id="173-ul_qml_dch_oe">
   <li id="173-x-7">Add it to version control (you <i id="173-x-8">are</i> using version control, right?).</li>
   <li id="173-x-9">Add it to the cabal file.</li>
   <li id="173-x-10">Add it to the <filepath id="173-x-19">Application.hs</filepath> file.</li>
   <li id="173-x-11">Put a module statement at the top, and an <codeph id="173-x-12">import Import</codeph> line below it.</li>
  </ul>
  <note id="173-x-20">One of the planned improvements to the <cmdname id="173-x-21">yesod</cmdname> executable is to automate
   these four steps.</note>
 </conbody></concept></concept><concept id="templates-widgetFile-174"><title>widgetFile</title><conbody>
  <p id="174-x-3">It's very common to want to include CSS and Javascript specific to a page. You don't want to
   have to remember to include those Lucius and Julius files manually every time you refer to a
   Hamlet file. For this, the site template provides the <codeph id="174-x-4">widgetFile</codeph> function.</p>
  <p id="174-x-5">If you have a handler function:</p>
  <codeblock id="174-x-6" outputclass="haskell">getRootR = defaultLayout $(widgetFile "homepage")</codeblock>
  <p id="174-x-7">, Yesod will look for the following files:</p>
  <ul id="174-ul_vih_ddh_oe">
   <li id="174-x-8"><filepath id="174-x-9">templates/homepage.hamlet</filepath></li>
   <li id="174-x-10"><filepath id="174-x-11">templates/homepage.lucius</filepath></li>
   <li id="174-x-12"><filepath id="174-x-13">templates/homepage.cassius</filepath></li>
   <li id="174-x-14"><filepath id="174-x-15">templates/homepage.julius</filepath></li>
  </ul>
  <p id="174-x-16">If any of those files are present, they will be automatically included in the output.</p>
  <note id="174-x-17">Due to the nature of how this works, if you launch your app with <cmdname id="174-x-19">yesod
    devel</cmdname>, and then create a new file (e.g.,
    <filepath id="174-x-20">templates/homepage.julius</filepath>), the contents will <i id="174-x-18">not</i> be
   included until the file calling <codeph id="174-x-21">widgetFile</codeph> is recompiled. In such a case, you
   may need to force a save of that file to get <cmdname id="174-x-22">yesod devel</cmdname> to recompile.</note>
 </conbody></concept><concept id="default-layout-175"><title>defaultLayout</title><conbody>
  <p id="175-x-3">One of the first things you're going to want to customize is the look of your site. The layout
   is actually broken up into two files:</p>
  <ul id="175-ul_jjz_kch_oe">
   <li id="175-x-4"><filepath id="175-x-5">templates/default-layout-wrapper.hamlet</filepath> contains just the basic shell of
    a page. This file is interpreted as plain Hamlet, not as a Widget, and therefore cannot refer
    to other widgets, embed i18n strings, or add extra CSS/JS.</li>
   <li id="175-x-6"><filepath id="175-x-7">templates/default-layout.hamlet</filepath> is where you would put the bulk of your
    page. You <b id="175-x-8">must</b> remember to include the <codeph id="175-x-9">widget</codeph> value in the page, as that
    contains the per-page contents. This file is interpreted as a Widget.</li>
  </ul>
  <p id="175-x-10">Also, since default-layout is included via the <codeph id="175-x-12">widgetFile</codeph> function,
   any Lucius, Cassius, or Julius files named <filepath id="175-x-11">default-layout.*</filepath> will
   automatically be included as well.</p>
 </conbody></concept><concept id="static-files-176"><title>Static files</title><conbody>
  <p id="176-x-3">The scaffolded site automatically includes the static file subsite, optimized for
   serving files that will not change over the lifetime of the current build. What this means is
   that:</p>
  <ul id="176-ul_rui_odh_oe">
   <li id="176-x-4">When your static file identifiers are generated (e.g.,
     <filepath id="176-x-13">static/mylogo.png</filepath> becomes <codeph id="176-x-14">mylogo_png</codeph>), a query-string
    parameter is added to it with a hash of the contents of the file. All of this happens at compile
    time.</li>
   <li id="176-x-5">When <codeph id="176-x-15">yesod-static</codeph> serves your static files, it sets expiration
    headers far in the future, and incldues an etag based on a hash of your content.</li>
   <li id="176-x-6">Whenever you embed a link to <codeph id="176-x-16">mylogo_png</codeph>, the rendering includes the
    query-string parameter. If you change the logo, recompile, and launch your new app, the query
    string will have changed, causing users to ignore the cached copy and download a new
    version.</li>
  </ul>
  <p id="176-x-7">Additionally, you can set a specific static root in your
    <filepath id="176-x-17">Settings.hs</filepath> file to serve from a different domain name. This has the
   advantage of not requiring transmission of cookies for static file requests, and also lets you
   offload static file hosting to a CDN or a service like Amazon S3. See the comments in the file
   for more details.</p>
  <p id="176-x-8">Another optimization is that CSS and Javascript included in your widgets will not be included
   inside your HTML. Instead, their contents will be written to an external file, and a link given.
   This file will be named based on a hash of the contents as well, meaning:</p>
  <ol id="176-ol_xmt_geh_oe">
   <li id="176-x-9">Caching works properly.</li>
   <li id="176-x-10">Yesod can avoid an expensive disk write of the CSS/Javascript file contents if a file with
    the same hash already exists.</li>
  </ol>
  <p id="176-x-11">Finally, all of your Javascript is automatically minified via <apiname id="176-x-12">hjsmin</apiname>.</p>
 </conbody></concept><concept id="conclusion-177"><title>Conclusion</title><conbody>
  <p id="177-x-3">The purpose of this chapter was not to explain every line that exists in the scaffolded site,
   but instead to give a general overview to how it works. The best way to become more familiar with
   it is to jump right in and start writing a Yesod site with it.</p>
 </conbody></concept></concept>