<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE concept PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Concept//EN" "concept.dtd">
<concept id="settings-types-248"><title>Settings Types</title><conbody>
  <p>Let's say you're writing a webserver. You want the server to take a port to listen on, and an
   application to run. So you create the following function:</p>
  <codeblock outputclass="haskell">run :: Int -&gt; Application -&gt; IO ()</codeblock>
  <p>But suddenly you realize that some people will want to customize their timeout durations. So
   you modify your API:</p>
  <codeblock outputclass="haskell">run :: Int -&gt; Int -&gt; Application -&gt; IO ()</codeblock>
  <p>So, which <codeph>Int</codeph> is the timeout, and which is the port? Well, you could create
   some type aliases, or comment your code. But there's another problem creeping into our code: this
    <codeph>run</codeph> function is getting unmanageable. Soon we'll need to take an extra
   parameter to indicate how exceptions should be handled, and then another one to control which
   host to bind to, and so on.</p>
  <p>So a more extensible solution is to introduce a settings datatype:</p>
  <codeblock outputclass="haskell">data Settings = Settings
    { settingsPort :: Int
    , settingsHost :: String
    , settingsTimeout :: Int
    }</codeblock>
  <p>And this makes the calling code almost self-documenting:</p>
  <codeblock outputclass="haskell">run Settings
    { settingsPort = 8080
    , settingsHost = "127.0.0.1"
    , settingsTimeout = 30
    } myApp</codeblock>
  <p>Great, couldn't be clearer, right? True, but what happens when you have 50 settings to your
   webserver. Do you really want to have to specify all of those each time? Of course not. So
   instead, the webserver should provide a set of defaults:</p>
  <codeblock outputclass="haskell">defaultSettings = Settings 3000 "127.0.0.1" 30</codeblock>
  <p>And now, instead of needing to write that long bit of code above, we can get away with:</p>
  <codeblock outputclass="haskell">run defaultSettings { settingsPort = 8080 } myApp -- (1)</codeblock>
  <p>This is great, except for one minor hitch. Let's say we now decide to add an extra record to
    <codeph>Settings</codeph>. Any code out in the wild looking like
   this:<codeblock outputclass="haskell">run (Settings 8080 "127.0.0.1" 30) myApp -- (2)</codeblock>will
   be broken, since the <codeph>Settings</codeph> constructor now takes 4 arguments. The proper
   thing to do would be to bump the major version number so that dependent packages don't get
   broken. But having to change major versions for every minor setting you add is a nuisance. The
   solution? Don't export the <codeph>Settings</codeph> constructor:</p>
  <codeblock outputclass="haskell">module MyServer
    ( Settings
    , settingsPort
    , settingsHost
    , settingsTimeout
    , run
    , defaultSettings
    ) where</codeblock>
  <p>With this approach, no one can write code like (2), so you can freely add new records without
   any fear of code breaking.</p>
  <p>The one downside of this approach is that it's not immediately obvious from the Haddocks that
   you can actually change the settings via record syntax. That's the point of this chapter: to
   clarify what's going on in the libraries that use this technique.</p>
  <p>I personally use this technique in a few places, feel free to have a look at the Haddocks to
   see what I mean.</p>
  <ul id="248-ul_iih_pve_wd">
   <li>Warp: <apiname>warp:Network.Wai.Handler.Warp:Settings</apiname></li>
   <li>http-conduit: <apiname>http-conduit:Network.HTTP.Conduit:Request</apiname> and
     <apiname>http-conduit:Network.HTTP.Conduit:ManagerSettings</apiname></li>
   <li>xml-conduit<ul id="248-ul_hbz_xve_wd">
     <li>Parsing: <apiname>xml-conduit:Text.XML.Stream.Parse:ParseSettings</apiname></li>
     <li>Rendering: <apiname>xml-conduit:Text.XML.Stream.Render:RenderSettings</apiname></li>
    </ul></li>
  </ul>
  <p>As a tangential issue, <codeph>http-conduit</codeph> and <codeph>xml-conduit</codeph> actually
   create instances of the <apiname>data-default:Data.Default:Default</apiname> typeclass instead of
   declaring a brand new identifier. This means you can just type <codeph>def</codeph> instead of
    <codeph>defaultParserSettings</codeph>.</p>
 </conbody></concept>