Recently, a large number of the dependencies for Yesod (aeson, fast-logger, warp, attoparsec, etc) have gone through major version bumps. At the same time, a number of *other* dependencies of Yesod have not relaxed their version bounds for the most recent versions of their dependencies. This situation leads to a lot of confusion for cabal trying to figure out a coherent installation path.

This is precisely the situation for which the yesod-platform situation was designed. If you are having trouble getting Yesod installed, please try running `cabal install yesod-platform` instead of `yesod`. (In fact, unless you have reason to do otherwise, I highly recommend *always* doing this.) If you have an existing project with its own set of dependencies, go into that directory and run `cabal install . yesod-platform`, which will attempt to choose a version of `yesod-platform` with dependencies that fit your constraints. If you use some kind of sandboxing, modify the above commands as necessary.

And let me take this opportunity to mention: if you're trying to build your code on a stable platform, you should make sure that you pin down the versions of all of your dependencies. Greg Weber [wrote a great blog post](http://blog.docmunch.com/blog/2013/haskell-version-freezing) explaining a technique that should fit into most people's standard build processes. Using the Stackage pinned version set will also guarantee builds that are coherent. And of course, building on [FP Haskell Center](https://www.fpcomplete.com/) guarantees stable and tested versions of packages which will be maintained.

__UPDATE__ There are two important command line options I should have mentioned. If you're running into dependency hell, try appending the following: `--max-backjumps=-1 --reorder-goals`.
